src/posts/brazil-work.md, before:

---
title: How the Brazilian IT industry is gaslighting it's workers to give up their rights.
description: With high unemployment rates and a lack of job security, many Brazilians are forced to sign very illegal contracts and give up on their rights as workers.
layout: blog
date: 27-06-2024
published: false
---

### Warning

I'm not a lawyer, this is not legal advice.

This is a gathering of my thoughts and opinions on the situation in Brazil as a developer with a little more knowledge on law than your average developer.

### A bit of background

Brazil is a country with a high unemployment rate.

This is know from some outside people, if you talk to any Brazilian person there's an 80% of chance that job, work or wages are something they will surely joke about.

[Following the IBEG (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) data](https://www.ibge.gov.br/explica/desemprego.php), the unemployment rate is around 7.9%, compared to the [US 3.5% in quarter 2024](https://www.bls.gov/charts/employment-situation/civilian-unemployment-rate.htm).

Brazil has one of the best labor laws in the world, it guarantees you the right to:

- Legal national minimum wage, at time of writing is at 1.412,00 BRL a month, which is 256,00 USD a month.
- 30 day vacation a year with an additional vacation pay (1/3 of the salary).
- Maximum working hours: 8 hours per day, 44 hours per week.
- Unemployment Severance Fund.
- Payment of 13th salary. (This is an additional salary given to you on the 12th month of work)
- Overtime limited to two hours per day, with 50% over regular salary.
- Pre-notice period of termination, around 30-90 days.
- Severance payments.

But if, I told you, you can give up just 80% of your worker rights in exchange for a salary about 3 times the minimum wage? To work with what you **LOVE** which is programming?

Not good? No problem, you will get used to it, since all companies will only hire you this way anyway, so suck it up and learn how to do slave labor, at least you're home office! (Wow such progressive)

### How?

Let me introduce you to the lastest trend in Brazilian work culture.

#### ✩₊˚.⋆PJrização✧\*:･ﾟ

We will call it PJ from now on.

So what is PJ, or PJ Working?

In leyman's terms is a contract worker, you are a PJ (Pessoa Juridica) when you have your own company and act as sole responsible person for that company.

So Brazilians just discovered contract work? What's the problem? The problem begins when you are a contracted worker working as an employee of the company. But we will get there.

Usually the process of owning a company and managing it would be the barrier of entry for most people to work with formal contract work, otherwise they would do personal contracts.

In 2008, Brazil in a attempt of make informal workers (street sellers, small shop owners, artists) legal passed a law which allow the creation of MEI's (Microempreendedor Individual), which is a simple a quick way for you to create a one man company, pay your worker taxes, emit reciepts, do formal contracts as a company, for all legal reasons when you're a MEI, you are in the eyes of the law mostly an actual company.

To be a MEI requires only about 15 minutes of filling up online forms, and a monthly upkeep of about 80 BRL (15,53 USD), which is used to pay your company taxes and your retirement fund.

So what's the problem? Seems great to be easily able to start a company and start to offer freelance/contract work, it's actually great, the contract system would work great if it work how it works in most places:

Company has work to be done -> Hire you for work, you offer a price -> Do work, company approves -> You get money, contract done. Look for more work.

But companies here in Brazil found a "better" way to do contract work.

### The problem

The problem arises when you're not the one taking the decisions about the contract, but the company is, all by itself.

What if, the contract was: "You will work for me as a normal employee, with all the obligations, all the responsibilities, and I pay you X."

Wow, a worker contract, means you have become a proper employee of the company right?

No.

Because the company is not hiring **YOU**, it's hiring **YOUR COMPANY**, your company compromised only of **YOU**.

So the company hiring your company has no obligation to pay any of your worker rights, no vacation, no severance, no paid medical leaves.

But in the contract, it usually comes with something like:

- You will work X amount of hours per month, with a minimum wage of Y.
- You need to work on Z days of the week, with a minimum of A hours per day.
- The company will not pay your company taxes, nor anything extra you need for YOUR company to work.
- The company will tell you to emit a receipt BEFORE paying you, and the company will decide the amount of what you put on that receipt.
- If the company decides to fire you, you will be warned with 30 days, there's going to be no severance pay.
- If you decide to take a vacation, you will not be paid for any time you're not working.

Alright, with all this, you agree to work to the company just like all the other employees, you just are actively deciding to wave away your worker rights.

They "can" do that because they are not hiring **YOU** they are hiring **YOUR COMPANY**, and is **YOUR COMPANY** responsibility to pay you your worker rights, but in the end your company is just you due to the MEI system.

### Why?

Let's talk about two different WHY's here.

> Why does the companies prefer this way of contract work? (Their justifications).

> Why would anyone be convinced to work this way.

The company will say mostly that since they are hiring you like this and not paying your workers rights, no taxes need to be payed to the government, so they can pay you **MORE**. It's way better for both parties, you get more money and a "flexible work schedule". And the company saves money paying taxes, it's a win win situation!

Dam, looks like a great plan, no money wasted on those bad bad taxes, and you get MORE money?

Some people may argue that the PJ system is a great way for you to work, but I'm not talking about the normal contract work. I'm talking about this weird, you are a employee with no employee worker rights way that they make you work.

Some arguments that some people may use to defend this way of work:

- You can pickup more work on the side and have no problem.
- You can get more money, because there's less taxes to be payed in the end.
- If you talk with the company properly they will let you have your time off.
- You have flexible hours and can work anytime from anywhere.
- The company can pay you more, because they are not paying taxes.

But is it really true?

### The reality

Let's talk about what really happens in most of these cases.

> You can pickup more work on the side and have no problem.

In the perfect world that a company would make a contract and put a low amount of hours to be worked this would be no problem. But remember, you're wavering away your worker rights by doing this, so what's the benefit for companies to ask you to work less? It's pretty common to have these contracts with absurd amount of hours that way overshadow the law limit of 44, things like 50+ work hours a week. Try picking up side jobs working overtime all the time and working on weekends.

> You can get more money, because there's less taxes to be payed in the end.

Yes, that's true, for the company hiring you, you still have to pay **YOUR** taxes, and the taxes of **YOUR COMPANY**. There's nothing really to discuss here much, the people that argue this point either don't pay taxes properly or don't know that the more money you make more taxes you pay.

> If you talk with the company properly they will let you have your time off.

Some people argue this with me sometimes.I would say is pretty idiotic of you to rely on your company good will to get your time off. You're complete relying on the good will of someone that is already refusing to pay you what you're owned as a worker. I know many people that have been working for years without vacation. And if you argue with the idea of "you can take vacation anytime you want, you just don't get payed for it" you forget your have a right to 30 days of leave a work right per the law.

> You have flexible hours and can work anytime from anywhere.

As long you are up for the daily meeting everyday of the week at 9am, and you are available between 9am and 5pm everyday to be called anytime by your boss wanting with you something. You're free to work your 2-5 extra work hours any time you want. And it's true that you can work from anywhere, but these are vantages that any normal worker contract that is home office can offer you. These are not special benefits of being a PJ.

> The company can pay you more, because they are not paying taxes.

Again, another argument made from people that either don't pay taxes or don't know what taxes are. The company is not transfering you what they would save paying taxes, first of all, the amount of taxes a company pays to hire someone as a actual worker goes into guaranteeing your worker rights, things like your government funded retiremnt fund, you severance pay, your medical leave. The company decides what she pays for her professionals, and she will pay you very little if she can. Most companies will use this to exploit the new people coming to the scene saying that 3x the minimum wage (the average pay of a junior programmer) is a great sum of money and that's only because they don't need to pay those bad bad worker taxes.

### Okay, now what?

Nothing, until people start going to justice with their complete illegal contracts and companies stop hiring this way nothing will happen.

Let's remember that your worker right are rights, any competent lawyer will contest a contract that has any of this. The worker laws of Brazil were approved in 1943, it's not something new.

What's happening is that this is becoming normal, and this is a problem. It happens the most in the IT industry due the fact Brazil still haven't officiated the worker function of a "Programmer". You will see this if you ever open a MEI, what you're profession is normally, "Maintenance Professional" or "IT Instructor".

If you're a worker getting now in the industry in Brazil, be careful about this, don't fall into your lies, you will regret in the long run.

If you're a programmer and works this way, first, I'm sorry, you probraly can't do much except hope you get another job and find a lawyer to force the company to pay you back for all she owns you for your worker rights. But doing this may get you blacklisted of future worker possibilities.

If you are a company that doesn't do this but have heard of this, **JUST DON'T DO IT**.

If you are a company that does this, and you want to be a good company, or not be sued to oblivion the moment that the government starts to strike down on this (You're avoiding taxes, you think if this becomes the norm they will just accept?) just revise your contracts and the way of work of your employees, if you want to keep with the contract work structure as close to what you have now, paying people for service done and not work hours, and discussing prices with your workers is the right way to go.

Commit message:

adicionado comentario ao blogpost brazil-work

src/posts/brazil-work.md, after:

---
title: How the Brazilian IT industry is gaslighting it's workers to give up their rights.
description: With high unemployment rates and a lack of job security, many Brazilians are forced to sign very illegal contracts and give up on their rights as workers.
layout: blog
date: 27-06-2024
published: false
---

### Warning

I'm not a lawyer, this is not legal advice.

This is a gathering of my thoughts and opinions on the situation in Brazil as a developer with a little more knowledge on law than your average developer.

And this is something I need to explain often when I tell people I work 185 hours a month getting payed less than 5 dollars per hour.

### A bit of background

Brazil is a country with a high unemployment rate.

This is know from some outside people, if you talk to any Brazilian person there's an 80% of chance that job, work or wages are something they will surely joke about.

[Following the IBEG (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) data](https://www.ibge.gov.br/explica/desemprego.php), the unemployment rate is around 7.9%, compared to the [US 3.5% in quarter 2024](https://www.bls.gov/charts/employment-situation/civilian-unemployment-rate.htm).

Brazil has one of the best labor laws in the world, it guarantees you the right to:

- Legal national minimum wage, at time of writing is at 1.412,00 BRL a month, which is 256,00 USD a month.
- 30 day vacation a year with an additional vacation pay (1/3 of the salary).
- Maximum working hours: 8 hours per day, 44 hours per week.
- Unemployment Severance Fund.
- Payment of 13th salary. (This is an additional salary given to you on the 12th month of work)
- Overtime limited to two hours per day, with 50% over regular salary.
- Pre-notice period of termination, around 30-90 days.
- Severance payments.

But if, I told you, you can give up just 80% of your worker rights in exchange for a salary about 3 times the minimum wage? To work with what you **LOVE** which is programming?

Not good? No problem, you will get used to it, since all companies will only hire you this way anyway, so suck it up and learn how to do slave labor, at least you're home office! (Wow such progressive)

### How?

Let me introduce you to the lastest trend in Brazilian work culture.

#### ✩₊˚.⋆PJrização✧\*:･ﾟ

We will call it PJ from now on.

So what is PJ, or PJ Working?

In leyman's terms is a contract worker, you are a PJ (Pessoa Juridica) when you have your own company and act as sole responsible person for that company.

So Brazilians just discovered contract work? What's the problem? The problem begins when you are a contracted worker working as an employee of the company. But we will get there.

Usually the process of owning a company and managing it would be the barrier of entry for most people to work with formal contract work, otherwise they would do personal contracts.

In 2008, Brazil in a attempt of make informal workers (street sellers, small shop owners, artists) legal passed a law which allow the creation of MEI's (Microempreendedor Individual), which is a simple a quick way for you to create a one man company, pay your worker taxes, emit reciepts, do formal contracts as a company, for all legal reasons when you're a MEI, you are in the eyes of the law mostly an actual company.

To be a MEI requires only about 15 minutes of filling up online forms, and a monthly upkeep of about 80 BRL (15,53 USD), which is used to pay your company taxes and your retirement fund.

So what's the problem? Seems great to be easily able to start a company and start to offer freelance/contract work, it's actually great, the contract system would work great if it work how it works in most places:

Company has work to be done -> Hire you for work, you offer a price -> Do work, company approves -> You get money, contract done. Look for more work.

But companies here in Brazil found a "better" way to do contract work.

### The problem

The problem arises when you're not the one taking the decisions about the contract, but the company is, all by itself.

What if, the contract was: "You will work for me as a normal employee, with all the obligations, all the responsibilities, and I pay you X."

Wow, a worker contract, means you have become a proper employee of the company right?

No.

Because the company is not hiring **YOU**, it's hiring **YOUR COMPANY**, your company compromised only of **YOU**.

So the company hiring your company has no obligation to pay any of your worker rights, no vacation, no severance, no paid medical leaves.

But in the contract, it usually comes with something like:

- You will work X amount of hours per month, with a minimum wage of Y.
- You need to work on Z days of the week, with a minimum of A hours per day.
- The company will not pay your company taxes, nor anything extra you need for YOUR company to work.
- The company will tell you to emit a receipt BEFORE paying you, and the company will decide the amount of what you put on that receipt.
- If the company decides to fire you, you will be warned with 30 days, there's going to be no severance pay.
- If you decide to take a vacation, you will not be paid for any time you're not working.

Alright, with all this, you agree to work to the company just like all the other employees, you just are actively deciding to wave away your worker rights.

They "can" do that because they are not hiring **YOU** they are hiring **YOUR COMPANY**, and is **YOUR COMPANY** responsibility to pay you your worker rights, but in the end your company is just you due to the MEI system.

### Why?

Let's talk about two different WHY's here.

> Why does the companies prefer this way of contract work? (Their justifications).

> Why would anyone be convinced to work this way.

The company will say mostly that since they are hiring you like this and not paying your workers rights, no taxes need to be payed to the government, so they can pay you **MORE**. It's way better for both parties, you get more money and a "flexible work schedule". And the company saves money paying taxes, it's a win win situation!

Dam, looks like a great plan, no money wasted on those bad bad taxes, and you get MORE money?

Some people may argue that the PJ system is a great way for you to work, but I'm not talking about the normal contract work. I'm talking about this weird, you are a employee with no employee worker rights way that they make you work.

Some arguments that some people may use to defend this way of work:

- You can pickup more work on the side and have no problem.
- You can get more money, because there's less taxes to be payed in the end.
- If you talk with the company properly they will let you have your time off.
- You have flexible hours and can work anytime from anywhere.
- The company can pay you more, because they are not paying taxes.

But is it really true?

### The reality

Let's talk about what really happens in most of these cases.

> You can pickup more work on the side and have no problem.

In the perfect world that a company would make a contract and put a low amount of hours to be worked this would be no problem. But remember, you're wavering away your worker rights by doing this, so what's the benefit for companies to ask you to work less? It's pretty common to have these contracts with absurd amount of hours that way overshadow the law limit of 44, things like 50+ work hours a week. Try picking up side jobs working overtime all the time and working on weekends.

> You can get more money, because there's less taxes to be payed in the end.

Yes, that's true, for the company hiring you, you still have to pay **YOUR** taxes, and the taxes of **YOUR COMPANY**. There's nothing really to discuss here much, the people that argue this point either don't pay taxes properly or don't know that the more money you make more taxes you pay.

> If you talk with the company properly they will let you have your time off.

Some people argue this with me sometimes.I would say is pretty idiotic of you to rely on your company good will to get your time off. You're complete relying on the good will of someone that is already refusing to pay you what you're owned as a worker. I know many people that have been working for years without vacation. And if you argue with the idea of "you can take vacation anytime you want, you just don't get payed for it" you forget your have a right to 30 days of leave a work right per the law.

> You have flexible hours and can work anytime from anywhere.

As long you are up for the daily meeting everyday of the week at 9am, and you are available between 9am and 5pm everyday to be called anytime by your boss wanting with you something. You're free to work your 2-5 extra work hours any time you want. And it's true that you can work from anywhere, but these are vantages that any normal worker contract that is home office can offer you. These are not special benefits of being a PJ.

> The company can pay you more, because they are not paying taxes.

Again, another argument made from people that either don't pay taxes or don't know what taxes are. The company is not transfering you what they would save paying taxes, first of all, the amount of taxes a company pays to hire someone as a actual worker goes into guaranteeing your worker rights, things like your government funded retiremnt fund, you severance pay, your medical leave. The company decides what she pays for her professionals, and she will pay you very little if she can. Most companies will use this to exploit the new people coming to the scene saying that 3x the minimum wage (the average pay of a junior programmer) is a great sum of money and that's only because they don't need to pay those bad bad worker taxes.

### Okay, now what?

Nothing, until people start going to justice with their complete illegal contracts and companies stop hiring this way nothing will happen.

Let's remember that your worker right are rights, any competent lawyer will contest a contract that has any of this. The worker laws of Brazil were approved in 1943, it's not something new.

What's happening is that this is becoming normal, and this is a problem. It happens the most in the IT industry due the fact Brazil still haven't officiated the worker function of a "Programmer". You will see this if you ever open a MEI, what you're profession is normally, "Maintenance Professional" or "IT Instructor".

If you're a worker getting now in the industry in Brazil, be careful about this, don't fall into your lies, you will regret in the long run.

If you're a programmer and works this way, first, I'm sorry, you probraly can't do much except hope you get another job and find a lawyer to force the company to pay you back for all she owns you for your worker rights. But doing this may get you blacklisted of future worker possibilities.

If you are a company that doesn't do this but have heard of this, **JUST DON'T DO IT**.

If you are a company that does this, and you want to be a good company, or not be sued to oblivion the moment that the government starts to strike down on this (You're avoiding taxes, you think if this becomes the norm they will just accept?) just revise your contracts and the way of work of your employees, if you want to keep with the contract work structure as close to what you have now, paying people for service done and not work hours, and discussing prices with your workers is the right way to go.
